---
Note_Type:
  - Profile
dg-publish: true
Fields of activity:
  - Digital Twinning
Position / Activity: 
Website: https://www.ri.se/sv/person/laszlo-sall-vesselenyi
---
## Bio
L치szl칩 is an ==interaction designer== with a focus on user experiences or UX and a background in information technology. Subject areas of great interest are ==digital games, game design and gamification, user-centered design, and general design methodology and design theory==.

Questions that L치szl칩 likes to work on concern interactions between humans and machines or computers and ==how they affect and are affected by their social and technological contexts==; how design principles taken from the world of games can be used to explore and change existing and future behaviors and processes; how the analog or digital game as a format can be used as a tool for various purposes, including entertainment; and how our decisions as researchers, designers and technology developers shape who gets to be included in and who is excluded from research, development and innovation.

## RISE Interview Transcript

Also let me know afterwards. Um bla bla and sorry for adding this extra thing. You can cut this out, but we have um, like an internal, uh, AI model that does, uh, transcription in, uh, GDPR safe way, if you want me to do that for you afterwards. Wow. Thanks. Wow. Yes, I was I was wondering about this. Exactly. I was following the project. Okay. Uh, yeah, maybe, but there might be a few, so I'll let you know and then. But. Sounds good. Thank you. And let me share this. This is stressful. Um, so I'll just start by giving you a little bit of context. I'll do this more or less formally just for the sake of also, um, getting the hang of it again for myself. Um, but so this falls in the this interview falls in the context of my research as a design student at HDC for my master's project, which is on video game modding culture and digital twinning of cities. Urban digital twins. And I'm speaking to a few people to get who have worked in this space, or who have some experience with that space to to get a sense, a little bit of what your kind of practical experience has been. So maybe a little more descriptions of things you've done, but also what is your take on it, you know, and kind of more personal. Uh, yeah. Subjective. Very, you know, uh, your thoughts on it? Yeah. The work will presumably result in some kind of report. Um, so my thinking is that, uh, you know, then the report will be sent to you to, to approve or maybe even just a verbatim in case, you know, I want to credit you or cite you. You can tell me how you feel. Um, and even at the end of this interview, if there's any specific bits or during the interview that you feel you don't want to share on the record or don't want shared beyond this, you can totally tell me. Yeah, that's about it for now. Yeah. Okay. Um. All right. So I was, uh. And how much time do you have? More or less half an hour. 40 minutes. Half an hour is fine. Yeah. Okay. Uh, I said I don't have anything scheduled after this, so we can go for as long as it requires, but thanks. Thanks. Okay. So, just to start, can you tell me a little bit about your your position here at rice and maybe a little bit your background? Uh, yeah. Sure. Uh, I am a, um, researcher at rice. Um, also at the same time, on interaction designer, those roles go hand in hand. Uh, for me, uh, the type of research I do here at rice is usually, uh, on a very, uh, applied, uh, level. Uh, so often veering into the area of even product design. Uh, but where I, um, contribute to or participate in different um, um, research aspects of the design or development of a certain product. Um, um, usually related to digital technologies and usually screen based digital technologies. Um, I have participated in some, uh, projects where we both had more, um, uh, space for theoretical research. Um, um, uh, both, uh, let's say purely theoretical research as well as, uh, theoretically oriented design research. Um, um, and oftentimes with overlaps with other types of technology than just digital or, uh, screen based approaches. And before I, uh, got to rise, arise, uh, to work as an interaction designer slash researcher. I, um, studied, uh, software engineering program at Chalmers, where my bachelors was software engineering, uh, or informacoes technique in Swedish, and my master's was, uh, in interaction design and technologies. Um, and I came to ride straight away, more or less. Okay. So that's, uh. Yeah, that's, uh, somehow relevant to what we're going to talk about. Is that, uh, prior to, uh, Chalmers, I did, um, uh, take some, uh, courses in cultural studies and humanities and, uh, and so on, uh, which fed into my choice of interaction design later on. And some of the research interests I have had, I tried. So. Okay. Good. Thank you. And so just to, to kind of dive into the the core of our discussion now. Um, how many different digital urban digital twinning efforts were you a part of? So I get the sense that there was one that we have briefly talked about, including. Ah, and that was tied to Sana's thesis work at Malmo. Um, yeah. Maybe. Tell me a little bit about these. The the array of projects that you, you were involved with. Yes. So and so the really the only project I've been concretely involved in, uh, regarding urban digital twins or urban twins or digital city scale twins. Yeah, exactly. I saw a new one in her paper. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Uh, there's a number of expressions for more or less the same thing. Um, it's been the project, uh, virtual Gothenburg lab focused on, um, exploring a number of pilots for the digital twin of Gothenburg. Virtual Gothenburg. Um, other than that, I've been involved in, uh, some, uh, uh, one of discussions and workshops, uh, uh, related to, um, both the findings of the work I was part of, uh, within virtual Gothenburg lab, uh, as well as related topics, um, but not, um, larger research efforts beyond that big project. Um, yes. And and, uh, to, uh, to clarify or, uh, uh, if there's any need for that clarification. So there was the project, uh, virtual Gothenburg lab. Um, it consisted of a number of pilots I was involved in. One of the pilots, uh, called, um, uh, for. Yeah, yeah, social sustainability and digital twins, uh, something like that. Uh, it had a number of working, uh, names, uh, uh, like social, socially sustainable, digital twin, um, social sustainable twin or social digital twin or even, um, uh, digital twins and equality. Uh, uh, partially because um, uh, it was a bit of a, um, foster child within the larger project. Uh, uh, because most of the other projects had a very, uh, technical focus. Um, um, not not necessarily driven solely by, but to some extent driven by the fact that, for example, two of the other five pilots, uh, or two of the other four pilots of the five, um, had, uh, um, companies like Volvo playing a big role. Um, um, uh, to basically pilot different scenarios of, oh, what will it mean to have, uh, automated vehicles, uh, in the city of Gothenburg, um, which at the same time was some sort of cool showcasing of how, uh, great, uh, different, uh, game engines, game development engines are for modeling the city. Okay. Uh, so there there were all these very technological and business oriented, uh, agendas, um, when some of the pilots, uh, some of the pilots had very clear, um, um, technical research cases, uh, for example, one with the, um, uh, exploring, uh, simulations of, uh, rainfalls or whatever. Um, in those cases, I don't remember like the, the different actors involved, but the, the purely technical, uh, case was very clear. Um, I wasn't involved in the startup of the project, nor the pilot, but I get the feeling that the social sustainable digital twin pilot wasn't necessarily shoehorned in, but someone had the idea that we should somehow address social issues as well. Uh, uh, I mean, oftentimes, um, um, uh, there's some sort of requirement from research funders that you address, uh, at least in Sweden, uh, at least like gender equality to some level. Um, most projects usually, uh, uh, pat themselves on the back for at the beginning of the project. Just stating, um, how many men and women there are in a project and they say, okay, we did some gender equality work in our project. Uh, but, uh, so, uh, when I came into the pilot, uh, both the big project had begun had been going on for a while, and the pilot itself, uh, had been going on for a while, and it had. I got the impression that it had sort of, like, been passed around a little, uh, between people who all had too much to do and too many other projects, uh, and or responsibilities that were a lot more, uh, well specified. Uh, so it was hard to justify, uh, investing themselves into this somewhat unclear, um, specified, uh, project or pilot. Um, uh, so, uh. But but, um, uh, even in this pilot, there were actually some, um, like, collaborating actors. Um, not the least, um, the, uh, like. No. Sorry. Reagan. No, no, no, no, uh, we can get to in a while. Uh, that's a good, uh, side note, uh, for later on, but, um, uh, especially in the municipality, sort of like the agency for, um, Social Development for one of the parts of the city. Um, I will have to, uh, look up, uh, what their name is in. Uh, yeah. Um, uh, Swedish, uh, sociology. Uh, um, so. So they are like the agency of the municipality, um, uh, responsible for following up on and basically advocating for, uh, social needs in, uh, urban planning. Um, uh, and, um, even before I got into the project, there had been, um, discussions with them. But once I got into the project, um, we had, um, a very, um. Uh, sort of a very long discussion, but not in one session, but but really for our year, a year and a half maybe of the remaining two years, uh, that were left of the project. Um, just trying to understand, uh, what are actually, And what is actually the current work of this agency within the municipality. And what is the role? Uh, what are their needs? What are their challenges, uh, in urban planning? Uh, very, very early on, uh, it was very clear that they, um, uh, this agency for social planning, uh, have a lot, a lot of methods for, um, doing inventory of social needs, uh, around the city, uh, for documenting it, uh, following it up and so on, um, from different angles. But then, um, uh, they are involved in, uh, all urban planning processes, but, um, and unsurprisingly so to say, their voice is not really heard, uh, every time. Um, um, even even even when possibly, um, uh, I mean, I wouldn't go so far, uh, to say that, uh, this, uh, social planning agency, um, uh, really, uh, manages to identify all the needs and, uh, and has the capacity to, to, uh, identify and lift up the most marginalized needs in the city, uh, which we can get back to, uh, you know, a bit, but, uh, but even, um, even the social needs they do identify have a hard time getting hurt. Uh, and that's one of the angles we approached, uh, uh, within this project. That. Okay, maybe, you know, quite solution is the way, uh, maybe the digital twin, uh, can be, uh, used somehow as a tool for, uh, elevating, uh, social needs within, uh, urban planning. So that was one approach, uh, or that was one entry point, uh, um, to the pilot, uh, for me and the colleagues who were involved. Uh, of course, over this very long, uh, recurring dialogue we had with the social planning agency. Um, it wasn't just us, um, trying to absorb information from them, but it was also us, um, trying to discuss with them how we understood, uh, the digital twin technology and related technologies that we then, uh, during the pilot identified and explored and tried to, um, uh, make, make them themselves the employees at the Social planning Agency reflect on whether or not, uh. Uh, these technologies could be applied or, uh, tweaked, uh, somehow to fit their professional needs. Um. Uh, so so this was like one angle. The social agency. How can we support, uh, the social planning agency within urban planning? Um, uh, the other one was that, uh, uh, talking to other actors within, like, the big project. Um. A lot of the time, um, when others try to suggest what we should focus on with the social sustainability. Uh, there was always a big focus on, um, uh, let's call it sense of safety, uh, within the city. Um, and, um, attempts to, uh, attempts to surveil, uh, sense of safety. Uh, um, model, uh, simulate and address a sense of safety. So we also did like, um, very, very, very miniature, um, social science crash course, maybe like, um, what are what are meaningful, uh, like social indicators in a city to, to have some, uh, to have some, uh, like, um, basis for us to argue that, okay, sense of safety might be, um, uh, let's say limiting, uh, perspective of what, uh, what a city should strive for, what social sustainability means for a city. Um, so, um, and doing this sort of like crash course in urban social science, um, was also one, one gateway for us to start to question, uh, um, like, with a lack of better words, what is the city? Who is the city? Uh, and this is one of the starting points for us, uh, to, uh, question the digital twin as this, um. And more, more broadly, like the urban planning process, but the digital twin as a technology within it as, um, uh, technocratic solution, as a technocratic interface face to the city where a limited number of people, of course. Um. Uh, not just limited in number, but limited, uh, uh, in terms of, like what segments of the society they are pooled from. Uh, but this, um, uh, I've been carrying, uh, with me, uh, a metaphor for this technology of the of the war room, of a hostile environment needing to be managed, uh, through high technology. Uh, um, uh, very much, uh, the picture of, um, um, of, uh, the the semi-secret, uh, military base, NORAD within the, uh, um, uh, movie Doctor Lovegood. Uh, and how I learned to love them. Uh um um, or like all these generals and politicians that are on the table. So very, very much, uh, that was an image we conjured. Okay, so this is sort of what, uh, the other pilots are making out the digital twin to be, um, uh, is there, um, is there a research gap here? Um, so that's what uh, so that was one of the starting points for us to start thinking of. Hmm. Maybe, maybe the digital twin can be interfaced, uh, in other ways. Um, um, because the digital twin, uh, is not necessarily this, uh, fancy game engine simulation of the city, uh, on a big screen. Um, uh, but rather a collection of data, uh, of the city. Um, uh, and that's, that was one of the starting points and said to us thinking of could this be could the digital twin somehow be put into the hands of the citizens? Uh, or actually, I also, uh, I wasn't very I didn't verbalize it very much in the project, but I also tried to, uh, struggle a bit with the word citizen and try to use the word inhabitant instead, because, uh, because of how, like citizenry. I mean, of course, inhabitant is also a political term in some ways, but but, uh, who's a citizen and who's not is also like something that limits who gets to be, uh, the city. Um, but yeah, basically, can the digital twin be put in the hands of the inhabitants of the city? Can we make, uh, can we can we make can we within this, uh, project pilot, take a stance for, um, the inhabitants being, uh, the city, rather than the city being something external to everything that's actually in the city. Uh, um, which was a question that really popped up all the time. Like, uh, what are we talking about when we're talking about the city? Uh, but so that's how we started exploring, um, to sort of fast forward a little bit. That's how we started exploring, um, uh, smartphone based AR technologies, um, uh, uh, as an interface to the digital twin or as a digital twin interface or whatever we call it. However, we tried to combine the Rubik's, um, uh, to I mean, of course, this is also like, uh, tech utopian, uh, in many ways. But how to empower the inhabitants of the city through technological means? Um, uh, and furthermore, within that um, uh, scope, we also, uh, had some ambition of, um. Uh. As, uh, at least in the concept phase, or at least in the conceptualization, uh, uh, of this work, uh, of, uh, trying to think through how, um, how can the, uh, digital twin for the inhabitants allow representations of the city which go beyond the purely physical infrastructure And, uh, furthermore, I mean, we, we planned for, uh, sort of like, um, um, uh, register feedback functionality. I mean, you could boil the concept down to that. Um, uh, in one way. Uh, but how can we avoid, um, this sort of, um. Uh, strand of thought that I've been coming into more recently is how can we avoid, like, the the, uh, deputation of the inhabitants by the municipal government? How, um, how can we avoid making, uh, making, uh, City of Small Officers? Uh, uh, in a sense, um, uh, instead of making people chase potholes and broken, uh, and broken lamps, which, I mean, uh, Um, can be construed. I'm going to, uh, use very loaded language here, but that can be construed in socially meaningful and constructive ways. Of course. Okay. Wow. My local lamp is broken. I don't want it to be broken. That's not a problem, per se, but. But it's very much usually constructed in a very ideologically specific way, which I try to avoid. So, uh, um, uh, instead of just being this sort of, um, complaint registration, uh, deputy station app, uh, we also wanted to think of. But. Okay, how can we actually, uh, make some sort of a co-creation space? Uh, virtual co-creation space? Uh, how can the city be, um, just like, um, just like, uh, some people would say, uh, graffiti is vandalism. So, um, some other people, Um, uh, we say that, uh, that's actually, uh, an expression of the city by the city, uh, on and in the city itself. And how can we see something similar? Uh, how can we explore, uh, or strive for something similar, um, within, uh, a digital twin of the city? Because, I mean, behind all of this, there is some, like, uh, a very predetermined decision. It has been said, and it will be so that there has to be a digital twin of Gatlinburg somewhere that is operating in the background here, that, I mean, we are in this, uh, multi-million, uh, project, uh, related to there has to be a digital twin of the city, but we try to at times also say that. Does it really? Did you get a sense of the why as to why there needs to be. Uh, I mean, uh, there is. Uh, and this can be the formal narrative, you know, like. Yeah, yeah, yeah. The the. Formal narrative. Uh, I think that there is some honesty in, uh, the formal narrative and that is sort of like Sweden, you know. Sweden. Yeah, sure. Generally. But also, uh, Gothenburg specifically wants to be some sort of, um. Hub for innovation and technological development. Um, I guess there's like some sort of, um, relating it to, um, uh. Um. Like the post-industrial society, somehow that everyone should be like a tech worker. Um, uh, and of course, also this old innovation. This tech innovation does, just like so many other tech innovations, will make urban planning so much better that the problem is with urban planning that we don't have a digital twin. Uh, um, like how the urban planning somehow presupposes, uh, that, uh, a lack of a digital twin like 50 years ago, uh, the issue with urban planning was that they didn't have a digital twin or 100 years ago. So there there was sort of that, um. In, in a way, uh, the way the formal argument went could be extrapolated to that. Um, uh, of course, also, there were some aspects of, oh, now we're having climate change and a bunch of complex, uh, Um, situations which really, really require a digital twin for us to understand what's going on and how we need to adapt and whatever. Um, so maybe that's something we can take a second to, to talk about this. I'm genuinely surprised. And this is from the outside with the the appetite, the promise of the digital twin generates for complexity. Um, but the very tangible, real challenges of documenting and simulating the complexity when working on it. So what what's been your experience with this, with this idea of, you know, maybe complexity, the idea of fidelity? Where do you stand? How did you wrestle with it in your own project? Yeah. Um, that's a very, um, interesting question, which, um, immediately makes me want to take a detour, but I'll try to address, uh, the question head on. Um. I mean, somehow. It wasn't really vocalized very much, but, um, there was this idea that we can collect perfect data of the world and we can perfectly represent the world and perfectly simulate the world that was very clearly there, even if it wasn't stated. Funnily enough, one of the pilots, uh, I think it was called coexist or something. Uh, that's the car one. That's the Volvo one. Yeah, it's one of the two Volvo ones, I think, because I think two of them were valuable ones. But one of them, I think it was coexist, uh, had like I don't remember what the technical term is, but agent simulations of pedestrians and, uh, the first, uh. Model that they based these pedestrians on were young, uh, male German students, which. How come that was the data set available? Yeah, yeah, yeah, that was the team. And that was a data set that they accessed. Uh, uh, I think it was, uh, a case of, oh, here's a data set of pedestrians, uh, pedestrians or pedestrians. Let's put them in Gothenburg. Uh, and also disregard that. It's an incredibly thin slice of demographics. Um, and also like these, uh, um, models, uh, didn't uh, uh, factoring for weather conditions, so they acted the same way if the virtual environment was, uh, rainy or sunny or stuff like that. Um, so, so, so, um, and I mean, of course it's fine to prototype with the limited, uh, materials, of course, but it becomes quite funny when, uh, at the same time, uh, this idea floats of, okay, we are perfectly representing the world. Um, we're perfectly simulating it. And this, uh, perfect simulation of the world is then, uh, the basis for how we will plan, uh, the city for the coming hundred years. Like, um, It's, uh. Yeah, yeah. Um, so, so it's quite funny. And it was quite present that, I mean, for, for many of these pilots that this, these kinds of questions. In some ways didn't really matter. Um, because and this is sort of my slightly polemic stance on it, but as long as we can make, uh, the cars look cool in the 3D environment, it's fine for this pilot. Um, um, and of course, if the goal of the pilot is to make the car look cool in a 3D environment, fine. But but still, it was within the scope of it was within the context of, oh, virtual Gothenburg lab, this great initiative to create virtual Gothenburg. The perfect representation of the city of Gothenburg. But that does not take me to the tangent I was thinking of earlier. But that takes me back to our pilot, because another thing we we contested, uh, was, um, uh, so, uh, I'm teetering on the, uh, border of this tangent I'm thinking of, uh, but, uh, I was thinking of previously, but, uh, so a digital twin, not necessarily a city or urban digital twin, but any digital twin is based not just on data, but it's based, uh, preferably or real time data, and of course, even non-real time data. But especially real time data requires at least one sensor. But preferably a number of sensors, which collects a number of different types of data. Right. Uh, so, uh, that could be any type of sensor, right? That could be the sensors of the, uh, um, uh, autonomous cars. That could be, uh, data from, um, different, uh, urban establishments, like, uh, surveillance cameras, uh, whatever. Traffic lights, whatever whatever. Lots of technical infrastructure. Uh, one of the, uh, sort of reasonings or one of the motivations for us going the citizen or, or inhabitant based or related digital twin was going back to the question of what is the city? And, uh, what is uh. Uh, if the city is a unit, a singular unit, how does the city make sense of itself? Who makes sense of the city? Um, and like, through that, uh, um, what are the, uh, best? Okay. Best is extremely problematic word. But what is the best censor a city has? That's, again, one of the reasonings to why we picked the inhabitants, because we argued then for ourselves that the inhabitants of a city are its best sensors. Uh, because they. Yeah, the inhabitants are the ones making sense, uh, of the city. Um, the city making sense of itself. Um, but so to simplify it, then, uh, a step away from inhabitant, uh, was like the smartphone, uh, which is quite a ubiquitous, uh, technology. Um, we did slightly discuss, uh, um, of course, we, uh, we, um, at least nominally addressed. Okay, maybe everyone doesn't have a smartphone. Sorry, we're not designing this for them. We did, uh, have slight discussions. Could there be something for people with cell phones that are not smartphones? And we basically said yes and left it at that. And for the sake of the pilot went on with a smartphone, uh, application as like the very technical concrete, uh. Uh, scope. Um, so so that's a reflection on, like, um, uh, sensors and, uh, data collection and, uh, yeah, we didn't, uh, explicitly address fidelity. Uh, so aside from, um, talking about, uh, as, like, the, like, within the theoretical framing of our work, that. Okay, uh, a perfect digital twin has a perfect, uh, access to the real, um, uh, system. It is a replicating. Um. We did sort of discuss it when discussing the app because, um, now boiling a little bit into the technical side, uh, is that it was intended to, um, work on a combination of a G.P.S. data and and local. This is really not my strong point, but, uh, hyper local, uh, cloud mesh, uh, technology that you would use your phone to create a 3D space, uh, of the space you're in and combining it with GPS data. Uh, um, uh, because the GPS data isn't, uh, super accurate. Uh, cloud mesh, uh, data is quite accurate ish within its hyperlocal context. So combining those two, um, data points, more than one in more than two data points. But I'm simplifying it. Combining those two data sources, um, and then also relating these two data sources to then the underlying digital twin, uh, infrastructure would, uh, make it possible for an, uh, inhabitant, uh, user of this app to locate themselves. Exactly. And start to interact with the digital twin, um, through the, uh, phone. And would also be a way, uh, to, uh, not necessarily have to simulate the entire digital twin or too much of the digital twin within a smartphone. Uh, because. Yeah, we doubted that a smartphone would be capable of doing that, uh, in a, in a resource, resource effective manner. So then the smartphone would only have to deal with the locally, uh, mapped, uh, uh, area. Um. Uh, and, um, yeah, supposedly that is, uh. Uh. Uh. I mean, I mean, it depends on where we want to go with the fidelity discussion, but that was, uh, argued by people who are more more tech savvy than I am. Uh, um. A good way to locate, uh, both, uh, the data you want to bring to the inhabitant, but also the data you want to bring from the inhabitant to the digital domain and to others. Um. Yeah. Uh. I think I'll stop answering that question there. Okay. Just, uh, to check on time. We're more or less a half an hour. Yeah. Um, maybe you have time, like, ten more minutes? Yeah. Sure. Okay. All right. Well, maybe. Maybe, uh, this can be a continued discussion later. Uh, also, uh, I'm getting a lot of really valuable context. And so thank you for this. And I love the idea of, uh, this technocratic interface having the dashboard as the people in that war room and the sensors as the humans running around. And, um, yeah. So maybe the last bit I'd like to ask you about is, um, uh. Thematically, broadly speaking, the transferability of the knowledge, um, that you have generated either technical or theoretical, um, and the place of open source in that. So the reason I ask is that I'm still somewhat idealizing the idea of open source or looking for desirable examples, and that's going to be something I look into quite a bit with this project. Um, and so what I'm most interested in is transferability of knowledge at large, but perhaps the role or not of that within that project and how that yeah, this can be about restrictions. This can be about stuff you made public, whatever you might feel like sharing on those fronts. Um. And perhaps then let let me rephrase very quickly, now that you have the background, um, of the citizens you worked with, um, were they to be interested in the experience they had and wanted to play with it? Appropriate it? Continue working with it. Uh, what keys or entry points do they have? Yeah. So, um, uh, to to to to answer this, I can start saying something that might, might sound like it's not directly answering you, but. So, uh, so so what? Um, the actual final, like technical prototype we ended up creating was like an extremely limited expression of all the ideas we had conceptualized and so on, and discussed with different actors for a number of reasons not so interesting, but so in the end, uh, it was basically, um, uh, we, we were lacking the, like the GPS thingy, but uh, we did um, have, uh, we, we had, um, managed to, um, implement this cloud mesh, uh, idea that if you with one phone scan an area and with the other, uh, with another phone scan the area, they would both recognize the similar geometry and think that I think. The conclusion. Yeah, yeah. Yeah yeah, yeah, yeah, I try to avoid, uh, too To anthropomorphic language about technology, but they will both. Yeah. Yeah, they will both. Um, yeah. See it as the same area. So, um, um, so we had created an app with a small, uh, inventory of items you could place, uh, within this, uh, space. Then you could analyze the same space, uh, um, with the same app, but on another phone. And then, uh, you would see these virtual items, uh, appear, uh, uh, so Pokemon Go with trash cans and, uh, benches. Um, uh, and the idea was that you could add comments and whatever interacting with which ways, but, uh, so so we did a, um, uh, small, uh, exploration session, sort of with this technical prototype and, Uh, to municipal employees at this, uh, social planning, uh, agency. Um, and I said we have we had a very, um, um. We, we had a recurring discussions with them, uh, and worked with them in many different ways over at least a year or more, a year and a half, uh, prior to, uh, actually having this exploration, uh, session. Um, but, um, and not that they were, uh, completely skeptical or something like that in the beginning, or they were like, not that they were negative to, uh. Uh, introducing new digital technology into their work process workflow. Um, but like, through this, these long conversations with them, uh, I mean, they had informed us a lot about their workflows and work situations and whatever. Uh, and they had also started to reflect on, uh, could, uh, there be some interesting use cases of, uh, specifically this, uh, are based, uh, um municipal, municipal citizen interaction platform, sort of. Um, so, yeah, we had an exploration session with them actually just outside here. And, uh, I mean, not so surprisingly for you as a designer, probably, but, uh, having this, uh, embodied experience of the prototype, uh, really, uh, I got I got the impression that they weren't necessarily impressed by, like, the prototype itself concretely, but it did, uh, open up a new design space for them. Uh, uh, they were I mean, they did appreciate the technical prototype itself, but, um, we had some, uh, uh uh, I mean, both during the exploration and afterwards, we had some, like, debriefing or the briefing on what they thought about all of it. Um, and later on, uh, actually, uh, because, uh, not not just through the official project, the pilot, the pilot presentation within the project and then the project presentation more largely, but actually through these, uh, municipal employees, through word of mouth of this, uh, project, and especially thanks to some, uh, thesis work, because, uh, that thesis work highlighted a lot of the potentials with this kind of, uh, project. Um, we actually had, uh, some, uh, separate presentations of, of our, uh, specific pilot to, uh, with the, uh. Yeah. I don't think I'm exaggerating. Like dozens of, uh, municipal employees working on related areas. Um, I mean, all of these agencies have all kinds of names like, uh, democracy and citizen influence and consumer rights and whatever. Um, all along the municipal level. Um, so I think, um, so this was still, uh, during pandemic restrictions. So we had lots of zoom meetings with like, um, 20, 30, uh, participants at the time, a number of them. So, um, and afterwards even, uh, um, uh, like and this goes back a bit to what I've said about, uh, other engagement with digital twins. Uh, outside of this project, uh, that at least for a year or more. Uh, after, uh, after the pilot was finished, um, we I mean, we didn't have, like, any scientific research paper on the project or anything, but we were invited to, um, different, uh, sort of, um, urban planning, applied research, uh, contexts to talk about, uh, uh, um, um. The, the app. Uh, so the work we did on that, um, so I do think that there is interest in this and of course, uh, one, uh, other, um, uh, sort of expression, uh, of their being interest in the work we did within our pilot. Uh, but not, uh, but not from, uh, among the project or pilot participants. Is that, um, uh, earlier this year? Uh. Uh, I was contacted by a researcher in the UK, uh, who I mentioned to you. Uh, who? Um, I, I don't remember exactly if it was first reading about the, uh, actual pilot itself or the pilot in general, and then, uh, um, Sana's thesis or the other way around, uh, but expressed that this was sort of, uh, that there was, uh, uh, this was a novel research area of, working with, uh, the digital twin concept, uh, as well as technologies of digital twins in this way of turning it in these ways. Uh, both. Uh, both, like the inhabitant or citizen focus, uh, trying to move away from, like, the, uh, technocratic interfaces, uh, trying to introduce other, um, let's say, interaction or experience values other than efficiency and planning, because that was also something we slightly discussed. Uh, like, how can we how can we, for example, create a more ludic experience, uh, of urban planning? Uh, and could that bring out something? But also, of course, especially when we put it in the hands of, uh, uh, inhabitants, like how, how, uh, how can such technology be made to enhance like rich experiences of the live, the urban environment? Um, so there is some interest definitely, in the research we did. I don't know how interesting it is, but yeah, just right now, we haven't really found an avenue for going forward. We did, uh, Sana and I, uh, have written a contribution to a book, uh, being written by, uh, or edited by, uh, this researcher, Paul Kirton, I think. Um, and it's supposed one. Of the two authors, right? Yeah, yeah. UK. Yeah. Yeah. And they're both called Paul. See something? It's. It's okay. I found the thing. Yeah. Um, and it's supposed to come out this fall. Uh, congratulations. Yeah. Uh, I'll have to follow up with Paul, but, uh, Paul's been very enthusiastic and also open for future collaborations, uh, and so on. Uh, so I can definitely recommend you getting in touch with, uh, uh, Paul. Uh, and I mean, from that, uh, Paul is very directly going at it from, uh, uh, game design or I don't think Paul has used the expression, but rather play ification than gamification. Uh, angle. Um, serious games done interestingly. It's a slippery slope. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. So so there is interest in the, uh, approach we, we took. I mean, when I look at one the city of Gothenburg and the city planning, uh, or was it start speaking has come to that. It's concretely like the urban. The actual urban building. Uh, agency uh or urban building office. Uh, urban construction office, something like that. They have like a small, uh, unit of, uh, actual like, uh, software developers who are the ones building, uh, the digital twin related technologies. They have been like, uh, uh, chugging on with their work. They have, uh, not reached out to us for future collaborations on that. But there is a lot of collaborations with rights on other aspects. Uh, but yeah. So that's, uh. That part I thank you. Yeah. Uh, did that answer your final question? Yeah, I think so. There was a little bit more on the technical side or where where do people go to find the tech. Yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah. Where do people go to find the tech? There are two. People. And have people tried, you know, but. Yeah. Um, the thing is, uh, um, uh, there are two smartphones over at Visual Arena. It's installed on those two smartphones. So you can try it out. Like, is it. Yeah. That was going to be my other question. Can I try it out? Yes. You should be able to try it out unless, uh it's it has broken things. So no not not super duper interesting, but, uh, so we collaborated with, uh, software slash game development studio here in Gothenburg for the actual, uh, technical development. Uh, they, they did an okay job, but, uh, or let's keep it at that. But they did an okay job. But but, uh, uh, I mean, they, we, uh, we succeeded in, uh, deploying, uh, the app. That's why it it's actually playable or usable, uh, on those two smartphones. Uh, however, uh, we received the actual I don't remember I think it was unity. We received the actual unity project, but last time I checked it, there was something broken with it. And I have no idea what's broken with it. And I haven't had time or my colleagues who are more, uh, um, uh, skilled, uh, in using unity have not had the time to actually look into what could be wrong. Uh, so on. What was the name of the game studio? I will have to look that up. Okay. Um, it's a smallish game studio, but they've done, like, serious work. Like they do. They do like, quite big commercial work. I'd be curious to know. Okay. Yeah. That sounds good. I mean, yeah, I think this is a really nice first discussion also. And it was my first interview for my interview in the in the context of this project. So thank you so much. And I'm guessing there might be a couple of occasions to speak again or uh, informally. Um, and I'd love to be able to, to make my work available to you in a way that's relevant or useful or anything, you know? Yeah. Yeah. No. And, uh, um, yeah, yeah. I hope you feel that this was helpful. Uh, I'm happy to discuss this more. And I'm very curious to Once you've had the time to sit down with this and reflect on what you think of all of this here, what what do you think of all of this? Um, uh, I mean, to, uh, to things that, uh, I. I don't think that we necessarily need an entire, uh, additional interview for. But one thing, uh, uh, one one question we really did bring to the fore every time we discussed, uh, our work within the pilot and also when talk, uh, when addressing the rest of the project. Uh, uh, was that, uh, is is the, like, current, uh, digital twin, uh, as it is constructed, as it is visualized, uh, the way it represents the city, uh, Is that actually at all a meaningful representation of the city? Uh, that's where I'm headed. Yeah, yeah. Um, uh, and and to make that point, uh, I looked up, uh, I think it's, uh, uh, 16th century map of the world, which, um, looks like a flower. Uh, so, like, uh, Europe is one petal. Uh, Africa is one petal, Asia is one petal. And, um, I am making the point. Who says that? That's a less meaningful representation of the world than a hyperrealistic, uh, 3D representation developed in, uh, unreal. Uh. Uh, and this is basically the question, What is Guttenberg for? Who? Uh. And there I mean, I went sometimes, uh, into. I mean, of course, it and so much with games. It's a metaphor from the military world. But I went to the metaphor of the fog of war, you know, in, uh, fog of war. Yeah, yeah. If you play the strategy games, you have this map and it's foggy and, um, with a lack of better words, what does the fog of war look like for different people? Uh, in the city, maybe Gothenburg for someone is the tram they take from work to home to. To work. Uh, and I mean, then you can, uh, I'm really, um, sued, uh, in this area. Sued in Sweden, uh, you know, uh, but you could, like, start thinking about, uh, how the, um, distance between, uh, Gothenburg or Stockholm and New York is shorter than the distance from like a richer part of the city to a poorer part of the city and stuff like that. Uh, what does that bring into the, uh, the the twin thing? So that's one one big topic that I think is important with this project and important discussing. Another thing is, uh, okay. I said, okay, games come from war. And, uh, I showed you the documentary, but, um, also, uh, what I didn't what was actually also a very vital point for the citizens as sensors, in a way, uh, is the, um, political, economic history of the digital twin itself. Where does it come from? It comes from the German manufacturing industry from the early 2000. Um, and uh, there, uh, you actually have, uh, more or less perfect digital twins because you, uh, you can just, uh, you can just, uh, like, flood your factory with sensors. You can, uh, make a complete, almost completely robot sized factory full of sensors, and then you can sit there at your panel, um, surveilling exactly what's going on in your, uh, factory. You can simulate what's going to happen if you, uh, modify things in the factory. And the third, uh, aspect, which is completely missing, uh, which was completely missing from the entire, uh, digital twin project, virtual Gothenburg lab, that it's not just, uh, surveillance is not just modeling and simulating. It's also supposed to go back and I mean, in a way, virtual Gothenburg and virtual Gothenburg lab implicitly addresses that. But, oh, this is a urban planning tool. So the way back is through the urban planning process. But I mean, in a, in a, uh, high tech factory, um, you see that this, uh, what do you call it, this line of product? Yeah. Yeah, yeah, this conveyor belt, uh, if I simulate it like this, it can do this. Oh, okay. Then we change the conveyor belt with a press of a button. What does that mean? Uh, for an urban digital twin that, uh, if we would really, uh, if we would really implement, uh, the digital twin paradigm, uh, on the city, what would that mean? Uh, um, and I mean that you could bring it back to, like, why is the sense of safety is like, uh, uh, the social sustainability issue everyone thinks is important within, uh, urban digital twins because, okay, then you just send, uh, ten drones to chase that teenager away from the store. Yeah, uh, could be one angle. Uh, but, yeah, that's that was also like one, uh, way of thinking, uh, one way how I also wanted to think about. Okay, but what are what are some interesting sensors, uh, based on that, who is already sensing the city? Yeah, all the time. This brings me to a side note that I really, really did not explore. I mentioned it once to Sana, who was like the only other person I felt at that time who was, uh, receptive, receptive of this. But, I mean, in, in interesting ways. Uh, I think you could, uh, explore, um, You. Uh. Digital twins, especially because of its political economical history within urban, uh, within German, uh, manufacturing industry. Combine that with uh, uh, Italian autonomous, uh, idea of uh, of the of the city as a factory, uh, that the factory has spread out from the city, and the factory has spread out from the factory, and the city itself is the factory. Um, uh. That that that would be something cool to explore, I think, uh, and I mean, just from our concept, just to have that not necessarily as, uh, but. Yeah, to have it as a lens in parallel. Um, Uh, how do we how do we understand why the, uh, uh, not necessarily how, uh, the digital twin developers are explicitly motivating it, but in a way, such a framing makes it very understandable. Okay, why why are we trying to regularly regulate urban life with industrial technology? Uh, what's so attractive, uh, about social life in the factory to those, uh, interested in the social life of the city? Um, yeah. Clearly, it's it's the workers well-being. Yeah, yeah, that's exactly. Exactly. Um. So. Yeah. So. Yeah. Yeah. Just wanted to air those, uh. Final things, and it does connect. So, I mean, because we had limited time, I wanted to focus on the specific project, but I think those are some of the spaces that want to be able to to, to explore. Um, and especially the, the image of the collage city and the sort of incomplete representations or things like that. So, um, but I'll keep you posted for sure, and I'm sure we'll get a chance to speak about it again. So yeah. Yeah, I'm. Looking forward to it. And did I, did I send you the I feel like I must have at the beginning, but the frame, the matrix, uh, articles, the three medium articles I, I wrote on the, on my work with this, but there's some stuff that you might be into. Oh, I can send you again. Yeah, yeah. I mean, but are they available because I've seen your two web pages. You have like, I understand, I have the old ones. Yeah, yeah. But you have like two main ones or something that you send to Gabriela. Uh, yes. Yeah, yeah. If they're available somehow through that, I can just navigate myself. Okay. No, no, it's a it's a separate bit. Um, but I will just stop.